Section 5.3: Inverse Functions. This is one of
the most tested topics on the IB exam.
An inverse function reverses the process. If f of 2 equals 3.
then f inverse of 3 equals 2. The input and output swap.
Here you can see: f takes 2 to 3. and f inverse takes 3 back to 2.
Very important: f inverse is NOT the same as 1 over
f of x. The negative 1 means inverse. not reciprocal!
Let's find f inverse of 11 when f of x equals 3x plus 5.
Set 3x plus 5 equal to 11 and solve. Subtract 5 to
get 3x equals 6. Divide by 3 to get x equals 2.
Therefore. f inverse of 11 equals 2.
To graph an inverse. we reflect the original
curve in the line y equals x.
Here is f of x equals e to the x minus 2.
Reflecting in y equals x gives us the inverse: f inverse
of x equals natural log of x plus 2. Notice the
key point 0 comma negative 1 becomes negative 1 comma 0.
And the horizontal asymptote of f at y equals negative 2 becomes
a vertical asymptote of the inverse at x equals negative 2.
Here's the big trick. If the exam asks you to solve f of x
equals f inverse of x. just solve f of x equals x instead. This
works because f and f inverse meet on the line y equals x.
Example: f of x equals x cubed plus x minus 8. Set it equal to x:
x cubed plus x minus 8 equals x. The x terms cancel. giving x cubed equals
8. So x equals 2. The intersection is at the point 2 comma 2.
Remember: f of x equals f inverse of x means solve f of
x equals x. This saves huge time on Paper 1. Write this down!